---
layout: post
title:  "Init 1: Maintenance Mode for Your Life"
date:   2020-11-15 17:00:05 -0800
categories: meditation
---
`init 1` is a UNIX run-level that administrators use in order to perform some kind of low level maintenance task. She knows that when she boots up into run-level 1 she is gaining complete, unrestricted access to the machine. There is no networking and no extraneous processes to deal with, and all you have to work with are the tools that are part of the core operating system.

I like to think of init 1 as being analogous to meditation. Sometimes you need to quiet the mind and drop down to a low level so you can regain control of your life. It doesn't necessarily need to be through meditation, everyone is different and may have their own system they feel comfortable with. But for me that process is taking some deep breaths, and letting thoughts come and go. This first post will explain what led me to meditation and why I feel it has helped me regain control of my life.

### The Rise and Fall of a Tech Worker

I first discovered that I liked working with computers (hardware at first) when I was in college. It was 1995 and I was working with a guy named Romulus at a movie theater and over time he ushered me into the realm of computers. My dad got me my first computer when I was ten, but I never really stuck with it once I hit Junior High and High School. But Rom (as his friends called him, and was very apropos) showed me the wonders of PC gaming and how you could hook up multiple computers on a local network and spend hours immersed in this digital world. It was addicting, to say the least. I didn't have much money, but Rom built computers and showed me the way. I became fixated on computer hardware, and spent many hours at electronic stores dreaming about buying 56k baud modems and network cards and the latest Voodoo graphics cards. Life was good.

Fast forward a few years. I met my girlfriend (now wife) while I was working for a small company helping the IT manager out with backups and other basic IT work. My wife lived in the Bay Area and we attempted the long distance thing for a few months, but finally I decided that there was really nothing keeping me in Southern California and so I stuffed my clothes in garbage bags and we drove up to my new home. I landed my first tech job at a start up in 1999. My desktop computer was a Silicon Graphics O2 workstation running IRIX. Life was very good.

Fast forward a few more years, past the dotcom bubble, past a start up that was acquired by a rival, and onto another startup. Here is where I want to slow down and put myself under a magnifying glass. Because within nine years I go from a lowly Sysadmin, to the Director of Operations at a $6 billion public company overseeing a website with millions of active users. The years flew by and I didn't even realize that I was losing control of my life. It's like the proverbial death by a thousand cuts, by the time I realized what was going on it was too late. Things were great, in the beginning. I was learning so much and that was always my goal in life. Even after we went public and I had to spend most of my time away from the data center and instead trapped in conference rooms with lawyers and accountants, I told myself that I was still learning and isn't this wonderful? Then we were acquired by our biggest competitor and combined we became the 800 lb gorilla in our industry. Life probably should have been great at this point, but sadly it wasn't.

I became so fixated on my job that I ignored everything else around me, including my wife. We would go out to a restaurant and I would have my phone on the table, glancing at it constantly for fear of missing out on the next fire (I'm sure this sounds familiar to a lot of readers). My life became so reactive, even though I knew I had to plan for the inevitable issues there never seemed to be any time to do anything but jump from problem to problem. We would have postmortem meetings to discuss how we could improve things after a major issue, and then all the tickets we created would get ignored because we were dealing with the next crisis. I would sit in endless meetings that accomplished hardly anything. My team's morale was slowly dying, reflecting my own spirit. I felt like my entire life was a poorly written program that got caught in an infinite loop that I couldn't break out of. Every day was a new set of challenges, and needless to say it was wearing me down and wearing my marriage down.

I had episodes where I would just completely lose my mind and couldn't do anything but sit on the floor and try to pretend none of it was real. Around this time I came down with the flu and was stuck in bed for two weeks. I had this meditation book that I tried reading several years earlier but it didn't catch my interest then. Now I looked at it like it was Obi-wan, my only hope. It was a very short book and since I was bedridden I looked for other books to read. I read The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, and Man's Search for Meaning, and began to soul search. That is when I decided I needed to hit the BREAK button, and reset my life. This is what Project Init 1 is all about, regaining control of your life because it's too precious to let yourself be driven by external forces day in and day out.
